The 2024 United States elections were held on Tuesday, November 5, 2024. In the presidential election, former President Donald Trump, running as the Republican nominee, defeated the incumbent Democratic Vice President Kamala Harris. Republicans gained control of the Senate and held a narrow control of the House, winning a government trifecta for the first time since 2016.[1]

This election cycle was notable for the attempted assassination of President Donald Trump, in which he was shot while campaigning in Butler, Pennsylvania. This marked the first time a US President (current or former) had been shot since the 1981 shooting of then-President Ronald Reagan, and the first time a US Presidential candidate had been shot on the campaign trail since the 1972 shooting of Democratic Presidential candidate George Wallace.
Issues
	
This article may lend undue weight to certain ideas, incidents, or controversies. Please help improve it by rewriting it in a balanced fashion that contextualizes different points of view. (November 2024) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
See also: 2024 United States presidential election § Campaign issues
Economic issues
Main article: Economy of the United States
Post-COVID inflation spike in the US, with the gray column indicating the COVID-19 recession in US

Voters consistently cited the economy as their top issue in the 2024 election.[2] Following the COVID-19 pandemic, a global surge in inflation ensued that raised prices on many goods, though the U.S. inflation rate had declined significantly during 2023 and 2024.[3][4][5] The New York Times reported that both candidates "embraced a vision of a powerful federal government, using its muscle to intervene in markets in pursuit of a stronger and more prosperous economy."[6]
Abortion

This was the first presidential election held after the overturn of Roe v. Wade, and the third overall election cycle after the 2022 midterm elections and the 2023 off-year elections. Republican-controlled states predominantly passed near-total bans on abortion in the aftermath of the Supreme Court's June 2022 Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization decision. By April 2023, abortion was "largely illegal" in several states.[7] According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, there were 15 states that had de jure early stage bans on abortion explicitly without exceptions for rape or incest: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, West Virginia, and Wisconsin.[7] (Ohio voters subsequently codified abortion rights in Ohio's state constitution via November 2023 Ohio Issue 1.) In states with laws granting exceptions, it was reported de facto that "very few exceptions to these new abortion bans have been granted" and that patients who had been raped or otherwise qualified for exceptions were being turned away, citing "ambiguous laws and the threat of criminal penalties make them unwilling to test the rules".[8]

Abortion referendums were on the ballot in 10 states in 2024: Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Maryland, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New York and South Dakota.[9]
Indictments
Attorney General Garland Announces Appointment of Special Counsel Jack Smith

On November 18, 2022, three days after former President and Republican candidate Donald Trump announced his 2024 re-election bid, U.S. Attorney General Merrick Garland appointed Jack Smith as special counsel to investigate Trump's role in the January 6th U.S. Capitol attack and Trump's mishandling of government documents, including classified documents.

On March 30, 2023, Trump was indicted by a grand jury in Manhattan for his alleged role in a scandal stemming from hush money payments made to Stormy Daniels before the 2016 presidential election.[10] While Trump would later be found guilty in a jury trial[11], shortly after the verdict in Manhattan the US Supreme Court issued a ruling on a separate case which acknowledged the legal concept of "Presidential Immunity" as a constitutional privilege afforded both to current and former US Presidents, and ruling that certain documents and testimony relating to a former Presidents time in Office were not permissible as evidence in a trial[12]. This ruling potentially effected the legality of the Manhattan case due to testimony, documents and other now-protected pieces of evidence used by the Manhattan prosecutors in their case, which Trumps legal team asserted that the court was now bound under their interpretation of the SCOTUS ruling to dismiss sentencing and vacate the guilty verdict[13]. Judge Juan Merchan has not yet issued a ruling on the matter as of November 13, 2024.

On May 10, 2023, Republican New York Congressman George Santos was indicted on federal charges of fraud and money laundering.[14] He later plead guilty to the charges, after initially pleading his innocence and refusing to resign from Congress[15].
Alleged classified intelligence material found inside Mar-a-Lago

On June 8, 2023, Trump was indicted on 37 federal charges related to his alleged mishandling of classified documents by the office of the Smith special counsel investigation.[16] The charges were later dismissed by Judge Aileen Cannon, a Trump appointee, on July 15, 2024, citing the unconstitutionality of the appointment of Special Council Jack Smith by the DOJ as the reason for dismissal.[17] While Special Council Jack Smith had initially filed an appeal of the dismissal[18], it has been reported that the Office of the Special Council had decided to wind down all prosecution efforts against President Donald Trump in the days following his successful re-election was declared (though the appeal may continue due to the precedent that could be set by the ruling)[19].

On August 1, 2023, a Washington, D.C., federal grand jury indicted Trump again on four felony counts of conspiracy and obstruction related to Trump's role in the January 6 attack and his efforts to overturn the 2020 election.[20] Those charges were later put into question due to the Supreme Court ruling on appeal that former-Presidents enjoy Constitutional protections against prosecution for actions taken while serving as President. As of November 12, 2024, it has been reported that the Office of the Special Council had decided to wind down all prosecution efforts against President Donald Trump in the days following his successful re-election was declared[21].

On August 14, a Georgia grand jury indicted Trump on racketeering and other felonies committed in an effort to overturn the state's 2020 election results and the Trump–Raffensperger phone call.[22][23] As of November 5, 2024, Trump had pleaded not guilty to all the charges, and Judge Tanya Chutkan had granted a motion by the prosecution to waive all deadlines in the case to assess if/how the prosecution could/would proceed[24].

On August 11, four months after incumbent president and Democratic candidate Joe Biden announced his re-election bid, AG Garland appointed David C. Weiss to serve as special counsel to investigate Biden's son, Hunter Biden, who was indicted on September 14, 2023, on three federal firearms-related charges.[25][26] Hunter Biden was later convicted on all 3 felony counts on June 11, 2024[27]. He is set to be sentenced in December, 2024 after the Judge granted a request to delay the sentencing[28].

On September 22, 2023, Democratic U.S. Senator Bob Menendez of New Jersey and his wife Nadine were both indicted on bribery charges.[29][30] He was later found guilty on all counts on July 16, 2024[31]. His sentencing is set for January 29, 2025[32]. While he initially sought to continue his attempt at a re-election bid as an Independent in the 2024 election cycle, he later dropped out of the race entirely[33], after previously resigning from Office in the wake of his conviction.
States attempts to remove Donald Trump from Primary Ballots

On December 19, 2023, the Colorado Supreme Court removed Trump from the state's 2024 Republican primary, citing the Fourteenth Amendment's ban on candidates who engage in insurrections.[34] Following this decision other states attempted to follow suit and remove Trump from the ballot in their respective states, though most attempts were rejected.[35] Both the states of Maine[36] and Illinois[37] passed decisions to remove Trump from their respective ballots and suppress any votes cast for Donald Trump from the tallies, though the decisions were paused awaiting US Supreme Court appeal from Trumps team on the Colorado ballot ban case.

The decision to remove Trump from the Colorado ballot was later overturned by the US Supreme Court on March 4, 2024,[38] after which all other attempts at removing Trump from other state ballots ended or became moot. 